---
title: Collective Kundalini Awakening
tags:  [Spiritual Tantra]
comments: true
layout: post
---

Anandamurti, in a talk called, “The Coming Ice-Age,” speaks of how the weather patterns on the planet have been changing drastically since the 1980's. He speaks of this phenomenon not as catastrophe but as natural change. He links the changing polarity of planets poles as the underlying cause. He says they will shift soon and with this change there will be changes in electromagnetic fields. Many species will have to undergo biological metamorphosis to survive these changes. Most human beings will become extinct. Only those with refined nervous and glandular systems will be part of the new humanity of the near future. I see this as natural selection in action, although here we are speaking of a natural selection based on consciousness and emotional intelligence instead of brute strength or intellectual cunning and ruthlessness. With very little personal, social, ecological, and spiritual consciousness it will be difficult for the collective mind of humanity to adjust with these changing electromagnetic fields. These human beings will become like the Neanderthals of the past, an extinct species unless there are very fast, radical changes. Anandamurti said that at times evolution makes a sudden “galloping leap.”

I view this phenomenon as a collective kundalini awakening. Kundalini, as the “fundamental negativity,” is the force latent at the base of the spine that brings every string of creation back into the womb of Om, dissolving every flicker of color and cosmic sound in the crown above the corpus collosum between the cerebral hemispheres and above the pineal gland. Kundalini is Prakrti, the Cosmic Creative Principle who manifests the infinite cosmic ocean of Purusha, or Consciousness into all of the expressed waves of this creation. Prakrti wakens this latent Consciousness and takes Purusha outward, centrifugally, into creation until the subtle wave of Purusha collapse into mind, then into energy, and eventually into solid matter, or “star-stuff.” With evolution of life and the expression of consciousness in continually subtler and subtler forms, life, this “blot of protoplasm with an urge,” eventually becomes conscious of itself. Trees, mammals, plants, and humans all have developed forms of consciousness which manifests in miraculous forms of organizing, adapting, and growing despite the material world’s entropy all around them! Eventually, these evolving microcosmic minds will become so aware of themselves that they will be able to ask themselves where this awareness comes from. This is the arrival of awareness at the anahata and vishuddha chakras. With the awakening of the kundalini, the developed vishuddha chakra begins to spin centripetally as the 16 petals or sound pulsations vibrate the 4 vortexes of the muladhara, or base chakra. It is like a whirling, astral tornado that creates a vortex from crown to coccyx. This 4x4 action covers every possible expression, every possible vortex of the muladhara from escaping outward into the sensory mind at the first chakra. The causal mind with all of its controlling strings of sound take charge of all of the inferior chakras by descending all the way to the lowest base of muladhara. It is an inner, highly organized and intelligent womb of sound and pulsation that awakens the kundalini. All energy that goes into the emotional expressions of the vrttis or vortexes gets sucked inward. This inward, centripetal symphony pulls and summons the kundalini upward and inward with all of the vital energy of the body. Here Prakrti begins to act and create deep inside one's soul. Purusha is the quiet eye of the storm looking on from high above. Both Purusha and Prakrti arrange the path of bliss, the ananda marga, so that the aspirant may find one's way through the various labyrinths of the ascending mind. This is the case with a prepared mind, however.

The structures of the individual and the collective minds are one and the same, they are interdependent and and co-existent. It is like a football fan in an arena filled with other football fans. Gain or loss affect both the individual and the collective body. Together, they form some form of meta-identity that both the individual and the collectivity depend upon, or believe that they do. In this similarity, we can see how the kundalini awakenings of individuals will parallel the awakenings of the collective and vice-versa. After 50 years of consciousness revolution in the West, and most of it inspired by hallucinogenic drugs, it is easy to find a plethora of examples of kundalini awakenings that have gone awry. This is most often because the voyaging pioneer of mystical consciousness was not psychologically prepared and/or awakened the kundalini through forced yogic means or through the use of psychedelics. Aggressive yoga techniques and psychedelics usually have the same results: states that resemble a schizophrenic crack-up. Even with cases of eventually successful awakenings, such as that of the Indian seer, Gopikrishna, are often agonizing and take one to the border of self-annihilation while on the path to Self-Realization. This blast of Shakti, or Prakrti, is simply too much for the average mind to bear. Could you just imagine what would happen to the average materialist, Big-Mac devouring, semi-conscious mind when it gets a dose of charged super consciousness? The clay jug of the self is shattered to pieces. Mystics and geniuses pick up the pieces and make colorful, beautiful, and playful collages and celebrate the dissolution of separateness into wholeness. The mundane person just finds his/her life is falling apart and cracks up. We, as a species, have no choice in the matter: the rules of the game are changing. We must evolve emotionally, intellectually, and spiritually or disappear from the planet; there really is no other alternative. All of the old mental structures that have projected and created our social, economic, cultural, and science are quickly becoming obsolete. In fact, they are already so rotten that they are taking us down with them. It is the desire of the collective and individual human mind to transcend obstacles that will decide whether one is part of the new humanity or not. If so, evolution will shoulder you and guide you. If not, and the mind wants to remain in the old and conventional, then entropy and decay will recycle one back into the planet for better use.

Kundalini is the root energy behind all mental expressions. Mind is a derivative of pure consciousness or Purusha that Prakrti created long before the Big Bang. Prakrti, as kundalini on the return journey, can mend any distortion and bring righteousness to our every wrong if we only understand her Way. Prakrti and Purusha are fundamentally one, and kundalini only wants to return to her beloved Purusha. One must have a developed anahata chakra, humility coupled with unswerving confidence and much experience in meditation to adapt to this higher flow. The lower propensities must be greatly purified, otherwise one will be pouring gasoline onto the bonfire of the ambitious, clinging, and fearful ego. It isn't the case that the kundalini of the masses will awaken and surge into the brain and rapidly transform and rescue us all. The changing planetary conditions of the present is really what is making us a race of insane simians. Nature wants to awaken us while our contemporary pseudo-culture only deadens us and holds up psycho-spiritual evolution. Few seem to be finding balance. Most nervous systems aren't prepared for what is already happening to us via the subtle mechanisms of nature. Although the subtle, inner laws of Prakrti will be as gentle as possible, it will be difficult for the awakening of the masses from the brute unconsciousness to just even begin to vibrate at the second, svadhistana chakra. The collective kundalini force is mainly focused on entering the second chakra and creating balance there. Here, at the sensory-intellectual or conceptual mind, we develop notions of self and world. There can be no balanced kundalini awakening if one hasn't a balanced connection with the external world via the svadhistana chakra. A strong svadhistana chakra isn't co-dependent nor conventional but rests its value on its confidence and congruence with the real world of Purusha-Prakrti's universe. A spiritual aspirant seeks not union with nationalism, with social class, or any other “ism” except universalism. The whole universe is our homeland and it is contained within Brahma, the union of Shiva and Shakti. Only those who can venture to take this step will move onward. Now is the time of the great purging. Balanced people, no matter how intellectually developed they are, will move up an evolutionary “notch” from their respective positions. It is much easier for a happy and emotionally healthy goat-herder in the desert to move inward than it is for a neurotic, apparently sophisticated, urban intellectual. The important thing is that all people try to expand from their present state, no matter what it is. Nature seeks balance and makes no prejudiced distinction between high and low. All microcosms are dear to Brahma. This is what is most important. However, the sad truth is that we as a species gradually grow sicker and more and more unfit and unable to make this critical step. True spiritual culture that cultivates deep awareness and moral responsibility is unavailable or inaccessible to most. Due to this, human intellectual and emotional life is becoming extremely imbalanced. There is very little correspondence between who one is on the inside and who one is on the outside. This contradiction will some day be understood as the underlying cause of the extinction of the old humanity. We must build a new and universal human culture on the ashes of the present one. Nature's Heraclitian fire both consumes and illumines, conserves and destroys. Only when the deepest desires of our vast, inner nature find expression in universal human culture, where all particular flowers are seen as part of the same beautiful garden, will we have a society and culture that is truly humane. Our glory is yet to be .

 
